# ents_casting: Long-term scenario generation and short-term stochastic forecasting for weather-dependent energy systems

`ents_casting` generates long-term scenarios for different weather years based on measured data from a single year and historical weather data. The long-term scenarios can be used to analyze the behavior of an energy system under different weather conditions.

Furthermore, `ents_casting` generates realistically accurate stochastic forecasts. The stochastic forecasts are made at the start of each day in the long-term scenarios based on synthetic weather forecasts. Weather forecast accuracy is derived from historical weather forecasts. With the stochastic forecasts, the energy system operation can be simulated and different operation methods can be benchmarked.

Currently supported time series parameters:

- `pv_local`: Capacity factor for photovoltaics.
- `wind_local`: Capacity factor for wind turbines.
- `demand_el`: Electricity demand.
- `demand_heat`: Heating demand.
- `demand_cold`: Cooling demand.
- `price_el`: Electricity price.
- `emissions_el`: Electricity emission factor.

Inputs:

- Measured time series data of each parameter for one year.

Outputs:

- Long-term scenarios: Each scenario contains the time series of all parameters over one year. A scenario is generated by learning the relation between relevant weather parameters and the measured time series, then predicting the time series for other weather years. ents_casting then adds a synthetic error term to account for imperfect predictive capabilities.
- Stochastic forecasts: Forecasts of all parameters are made at the start of each day in the long-term scenarios. The forecast horizon is 6 days with hourly resolution.

## Installation

Clone the git repository:

```bash
git clone git@git-ce.rwth-aachen.de:ltt/opt/ents_casting.git
```

Create the venv:

```bash
python3 -m venv ./venv_s2_mpc
```

Activate the venv:

```bash
source ./venv_s2_mpc/bin/activate
```

Install `ents_casting` and all required packages:

```bash
pip install -e ./ents_casting
```

## Configure `config.yaml`

The file `config.yaml` contains all information about which data is used for scenario and forecast generation. The parameters are documented in the file.

## Provide historical measured data for your case study

You can provide your own historical measured data by copying them into `data/measured_data/data_{year}.csv`. They year depends on the `training_years` specified in `config.yaml`. You can use different years of measured data for different parameters.

## Run the main entry point (or individual steps within it)

```bash
python -m ents_casting
```

The main script runs, in order:

1. Download the historical weather data for the specified weather years and locations.
2. Download the historical weather forecasts.
3. Train the LightGBM forecast models, including k-fold cross-validation.
4. Generate the long-term scenarios for the specified weather years using the trained LightGBM models.
5. Fit AR models to the error between the generated long-term scenarios and the measured data.
6. Add AR noise to the long-term scenarios and plot the long-term scenarios.
7. Train the AR error models for weather forecasts.
8. Train the AR error models for residuals between the LightGBM forecasts and measured data.
9. Generate the short-term forecasts for each day of the long-term scenarios and plot the stochastic forecasts.

When using many (>10) historical weather years, API limitations may lead to errors when downloading the weather data. In that case, reduce the number of locations for which the weather data should be downloaded. In this way, you can download the data in multiple steps.

## Authorship and contributions

`ents_casting` has been developed at the Institute of Technical Thermodynamics (RWTH Aachen University) by:

- Benedict Brosius
- Jan Wilberg
- Mats Zoellmann

## Citation

If `ents_casting` supports your scientific work, please cite:

Brosius, B., Zoeller, J., Zoellmann, M., Helders, S., Nilges, B., Schricker, H., & von der Assen, N. (2026). *Model predictive control of smart energy systems with seasonal storage: Mitigating the end-of-horizon effect via stochastic dynamic programming*. Energy Conversion and Management: X. <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ecmx.2026.102138>

## License

[BSD 3-Clause License](https://github.com/RWTH-LTT/ents_casting/blob/main/LICENSE)
